hello um
it's uh
it's such an honor to be invited to just
talk about david
um in his honor and a number of people
have already spoken about the spirit of
collaboration and how he embodied that
spirit um
in
occupy wall street and where i met him
and several people did and and other
times and
how much he believed in
collaboration and how generous he he was
and i'd like to read a quote from his
forthcoming book uh the dawn of
everything
that um
shows
that talks about that which david
exemplified um collaboration cooperation
and generosity and and the way he backs
it up
over page after page after page shows
uh in
in the following the rest of the book um
i think shows his precise mind and the
way in his hands anthropology truly does
become the most exact social science um
and i think it it gives me the feeling
that left-wing movements can
achieve marvels in a world that
sometimes seems overwhelmingly negative
so here's here's uh
here's the quote
um
what's meant by a self-conscious
political actor
is what this is about
neuroscientists tell us we spend the
overwhelming majority of our time
effectively on autopilot working out
habitual forms of behavior without any
sort of conscious reflection
when we're capable of self-awareness
it's usually for very brief periods of
time the window of consciousness during
which we can hold a thought or work out
a problem tends to be on average
roughly seven seconds
what neuroscientists and it must be said
most contemporary philosophers almost
never notice however
is that the great exception to this is
when we're talking to someone else
in conversation we can hold thoughts and
reflect on problems sometimes for hours
on end
this is of course why so often even if
we're trying to figure out something by
ourselves we imagine arguing with or
explaining it to someone else human
thought is inherently dialogic ancient
philosophers tended to be keenly aware
of all this that's why whether they were
in china india or greece they tended to
write their books in the form of
dialogues
humans were only fully self-conscious
when arguing with one another trying to
sway each other's views or working out a
common problem
true individual self-consciousness
meanwhile was imagined as something that
only a few wise sages could perhaps
achieve through long study exercise
discipline and meditation
what we now call political consciousness
was always assumed to come first in this
sense the western philosophical
tradition has taken a rather unusual
direction over the last few centuries
around the same time as it abandoned
dialogue as its typical mode of writing
it also began imagining the isolated
rational self-conscious individual not
as a rare achievement something
typically accomplished if at all after
literally years of living isolated in a
cave or monastic cell or on top of a
pillar in the desert somewhere but is
the normal default state of human beings
anywhere which i guess economists would
recognize as the rational actor that's
completely mythological
even stranger over the course of the
18th and 19th centuries it was political
self-consciousness that european
philosophers came to see as some kind of
amazing historical achievement as a
phenomenon which only really became
possible with the enlightenment itself
and the subsequent american and french
revolutions before that it was assumed
people blindly followed traditions or
what they were or what they assumed to
be the will of god
even when peasants or popular rebels
did rise up to try to overthrow
oppressive regimes they couldn't admit
that they were doing so but convinced
their own selves that they were
restoring ancient customs or acting on
some kind of divine inspiration
to victorian intellectuals the notion of
people self-consciously imagining a
social order more to their liking and
then trying to bring it into being was
simply not applicable before the modern
age and he goes on to
describe um how indeed rich the history
of people coming up with new social
orders um
is
and it's just i think it's a beautiful
passage and a beautiful book and and
embodies his
the the
the kind of thought that he or expresses
the kind of thought that he embodied the
generosity
and um
i'm so glad to
to still have him with us in many ways
and uh i feel his presence every time i
feel hopeful so thanks david